Vis repeatedly executes a specified command and refreshes the display
of its output on the screen.  This has the effect of making any
normally non-screen oriented command into a screen oriented one.

The first line on the output screen is reserved for vis status and will
contain the command on the left side with the current execution count
on the right side.  If command is too long to fit, vis will truncate it
in the status line and append an ellipsis ("...").

The output of the command normally begins on the third line and
continues to the end of the screen.  Lines which can not fit will be
discarded.  When this occurs, vis will automatically place the output
of following passes starting on line two in order to maximize the
amount of displayed information.

See the manual page for a complete information.


     Copyright (c) 1988 by George M. Sipe.  All rights reserved.

This software may only be redistributed without fee and without any
other form of monetary gain (including sold, rented, leased, or
traded), unless the express written permission of the copyright holder
is obtained in advance.

This copyright notice must be reproduced in its entirety on all copies
of this software.  Further, acknowledgment of the authorship of this
software must not be removed from its current or derived
documentation.

No expressed or implied warranty is made for this software.  No party
connected with this software assumes any liability or responsibility
for its use, the correctness of its operation, or its fitness for any
purpose.

Any distributor of copies of this software shall grant the recipient
permission for further redistribution as permitted by this notice.

Permission is hereby granted to copy, reproduce, redistribute and
otherwise use this software as long as the conditions above are
strictly adhered to.

NOTE:	This software was originally written by Dan Heller
	(argv@sri-spam.arpa) and enhanced / generalized by
	George M.  Sipe (rebel!george) to the point where Dan
	would no longer recoginze it.  No copyright notices
	were embodied in the original net distribution.

	Steve Alter (alter@ttidca.tti.com) added the -h option.

	Anton Chernoff (abc@lpi.uucp) added the -s option.
