.TH VIS l "24 October 1988"
.SH NAME
vis \- repeatedly run command, refreshing screen
.SH SYNTAX
.B vis "[-d delay] [-f] [-h] [-s] command [args]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vis
repeatedly executes a specified
.B command
and refreshes the display of its output on the screen.  This has the
effect of making any normally non-screen oriented command into a screen
oriented one.
.PP
.B Command
may represent multiple commands by enclosing them in quotes and
separating them by ``;''.  Similarly, commands may be piped together by
enclosing them in quotes and separating them by ``|''.  The single or
double quotes around such a compound command are necessary to escape
processing from the shell.
.PP
The first line on the output screen is reserved for
.I vis
status and will contain the
.B command
on the left side with the current execution count on the right side.  If
.B command
is too long to fit,
.I vis
will truncate it in the status line and append an ellipsis ("...").
.PP
The output of the command normally begins on the third line and
continues to the end of the screen.  Lines which can not fit will be
discarded.  When this occurs,
.I vis
will automatically place the output of following passes starting on line
two in order to maximize the amount of displayed information.
.PP
The following switches may be specified if desired:
.TP 10
.B "-d delay"
specifies a non-default delay of
.B delay
seconds.  Normally
.I vis
will delay for 15 seconds between command re-executions.  If a
non-default delay is specified, the
.I vis
status line will also include the delay interval centered within it
(unless that would cause it to overwrite a long command, in which case
it will be centered between the end of the command and the execution
count).
.TP
.B -f
.I Vis
will automatically terminate if
.B command
returns a non-zero status.  The
.B -f
flag forces
.I vis
to continue.  When
.B -f
is specified,
.I vis
will not terminate and will instead precede the execution count in the
.I vis
status line by a ``!'' flag whenever a non-zero status has been returned
by
.B command .
.TP
.B -h
causes the entire status line and the following blank line to be
suppressed, which leaves the full screen available for the output of
.B command .
.TP
.B -s
causes
.I vis
to use standout mode for any bytes that have changed between the
previous execution of
.B command
and the current one.
.SH EXAMPLES
vis ps
.IP "" 5
Continually display the status of processes on the system (up to 23
lines).
.PP
vis -d 60 'who ; echo ""; df'
.IP "" 5
Display the system users and disk usage statistics every 60 seconds.
Separate the two with a blank line.
.PP
vis -s ls -l
.IP "" 5
Continually display a long directory listing, highlighting via standout
mode the parts that change each time.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
User Commands (1):  sh, csh
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If
.B command
returns a non-zero status and
.B -f
has not been specified to
.I vis ,
.I vis
will terminate and return that status.
.SH AUTHOR
Originally written by Dan Heller (argv@sri-spam.arpa).
.PP
It has been substantially enhanced and generalized by George M. Sipe
(currently - 7/88, at rebel!george) to the point where Dan would no
longer recognize it.
.PP
Steve Alter (alter@ttidca.tti.com) added the -h option.
.PP
Anton Chernoff (abc@lpi.uucp) added the -s option.
